environment
biology
environment
family
political
economic
cultural
norms 
values
genetic
parenting
environment
parents
socio-economic status
schools
community
hormonal
self-control
reactivity
conflict
parents
risky behavior
self-control
emotional reactivity
pubertal maturation
self-regulatory abilities
primary caregivers
socialization
cognition
parenting behaviors
attachment
central nervous system
cognition
self-regulation
neurocognitive development
polyvagal
emotional experience
autonomous nervous system
neurocognitive
self regulation
motivational brain circuits
inhibitory brain circuits
daily stress
impulsivity
peer approval
peers
parents
modeling
parenting practices
emotional family climate
attachment
marital relationship quality
fathers
peers
strategies
siblings
cultural context
social information processing
strategies
emotional experience
communication
socio-cultural
temperament
biology
neurocognitive development
genetic predispositions
parents
teachers
peers
parenting
modeling
culture
media
fathers
neurocognitive development
pubertal maturation
individuation
conflict
mood variability
peers
social status
norms
peer pressure
risk taking
Pubertal development
sexual behavior
romantic behavior
sex differences
gender
strategies
negative emotionality
positive emotionality
hormonal changes
stress response
abstract thought
identity formation
emotional understanding
empathy
